Earlier the constitution empowered the central government to levy excise duty duty on manufacturing and service taxes on the supply of services. Similarly, it empowers the state government to levy the state tax on Value Added Tax (VAT) on sales of goods. This exclusive division of fiscal powers has led to a
manipulation of indirect tax in the country. Further, a central tax was levied on intrastate of goods. In addition, many states also levy entry tax on the entry of goods in their locality. So, as to overcome this problem, the government at this stage has introduced a single taxation system which includes in itself all taxes to avoid the various problems related to taxation system and thus giving this control in only one hand. GST stands for Goods and Services Tax. It is an indirect tax throughout India to replace taxes levied by the central and state government. It was introduced as the 122 Amendment Act, 2016, following passage of Constitution 122 Bill Amendment. The GST is governed by GST Council and its chairman is UNION FINANCE MINISTER OF INDIA →>>
ARUN JAITLEY.
This simplicity of the tax is leading to easier terms of a reduction in the overall tax burden on goods and free movement of goods from one state to another without stopping at borders for hours.
GST was applicable from 1st July 2017. The reform in indirect taxes was
introduced by VISHWANATH PRATAP
SINGH.

GST is set to become one of the biggest financial reform that our country has witnessed.
GST is a tax on goods and services under which every person is liable to pay tax.


‌Types
The State Goods and Services Tax or SGST is a tax under the GST regime that is applicable on intrastate (within the same state) transactions. In the case of an intrastate supply of goods and/or services, both State GST and Central GST are levied. It is governed by the SGST Act. The revenue earned through SGST is solely claimed by the respective state government.


Just like State GST, the Central Goods and Services Tax or CGST is a tax under the GST regime that is applicable on intrastate (within the same state) transactions. The CGST is governed by the CGST Act. The revenue earned from CGST is collected by the Central Government. 
In a Intrastate transaction , for example  if a trader from West Bengal has sold goods to a customer in West Bengal worth Rs.5,000, then the GST applicable on the transaction will be partly CGST and partly SGST. If the rate of GST charged is 18%, it will be divided equally in the form of 9% CGST and 9% SGST. The total amount to be charged by the trader, in this case, will be Rs.5,900. Out of the revenue earned from GST, 50% i.e. Rs.450, will go to the Central Government in the form of CGST and 
another 50% i.e. Rs.450, will go to the State Government in the form of SGST.


The Integrated Goods and Services Tax or IGST is a tax under the GST regime that is applied on the interstate (between 2 states) supply of goods and/or services as well as on imports and exports. The IGST is governed by the IGST Act. Under IGST, the body responsible for collecting the taxes is the Central Government. After the collection of taxes, it is further shared with the state in which the goods are imported by the Central Government. For instance, if a trader from West Bengal has sold goods to a customer in Karnataka worth Rs.5.000, then IGST will be applicable as the transaction is an interstate transaction. If the rate of GST charged on the goods is 18%, the trader will charge Rs.5,900 for the goods. The IGST collected is Rs 900, in which 50% revenue i.e. Rs 450 will go to Central government and another 50% will go to the State Government in which goods are imported i.e. Karnataka government.

‌Reasons
There was no uniformity of tax rates and structure across states.GST brings in uniform taxation on goods and services throughout the country.

There was a situation of cascading of taxes in pre-GST regime. i.e., there used to be a tax on tax. The state taxes were calculated on the combine value of goods+ central taxes in those goods. This negative phenomena vanishes in GST as there is only GST that is applicable on all goods. This will bring down the prices of goods.

GST allows seamless credit. i.e. it allows you to use the GST paid on raw materials to pay the GST on your finished product/output services. This will again ensure that only value addition is taxed at each stage of production, thereby reducing prices.

‌Positive Impacts 
GST made it a lot easier for businesses to calculate taxes and stay on top of tax payment. Also,  the cost of running logistics and operations has significantly reduced.

Single national market: Long queues of trucks at state borders disappeared as checkposts were dismantled, creating a seamless national market. These barriers had restricted movement of goods across the country, leading to huge delays and increasing transaction costs for the logistics sector, eventually translating into higher costs for consumers.

One tax nationally: A consumer in Kanyakumari now pays the same tax on an item as one in Jammu & Kashmir. GST has also allowed businesses to streamline distribution systems-production, supply chain, storage-to make them more efficient, having previously been forced to design them keeping state taxes in mind.

‌Advantages
GST is a transparent tax and also reduces the number of indirect taxes.

Benefit people as prices will come down which in turn will help companies as consumption will increase.

GST will be levied only at the final destination of consumption based on the VAT principle and not at various points (from manufacturing to retail outlets). This will help in removing economic distortions and bring about development of a common national market.

• GST will also help to build a transparent and corruption-free tax administration.

GST is backed by the GSTN, which is a fully integrated tax platform to deal with all aspects of GST.

‌Disadvantages
Some Economist says that GST in India would impact negatively on the real estate market. It would add up to 8 percent to the cost of new homes and reduce demand by about 12 percent

Some Experts says that CGST (Central GST), SGST(State GST) are nothing but new names for Central Excise/Service Tax, VAT and CST. Hence, there is no major reduction in the number of tax layers

Some retail products currently have only a four percent tax on them. After GST, garments, and clothes could become more expensive.

‌GST slab Rates
In India, almost 500+ services and over 1300 products fall under the 4 major GST slabs. These comprise rates of 5%, 12%, 18%. and 28%. The GST Council periodically revises the items under each slab rate to adjust them according to industry demands and market trends. The updated structure ensures that the essential items fall under lower tax brackets, while luxury products and services entail higher GST rates.7 % of the items come under the exempted list, 14% of the items attract a 5% tax, 17% of the items attract a 12% tax, and 43% of the items attract an 18 % tax slab, while only 19% of the items fall under the highest slab of 28% in the new regime.


